Added JAX domain example, vision image segmentation (#93)
jax-ml/jax-ai-stack: docs/JAX_examples_image_segmentation.md

+++

## Prepare image segmentation dataset and dataloaders

In this section we use [Oxford Pets dataset](https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/%7Evgg/data/pets/).
We download images and masks and provide a code to work with the dataset.
This approach can be easily extended to any image segmentation datasets and users can reuse this code for their own datasets.

In the code below we make a choice of using OpenCV and Pillow to read images and masks as NumPy arrays, [Albumentations](https://github.com/albumentations-team/albumentations) for data augmentations and
[`grain`](https://github.com/google/grain/) for batched data loading. This choice of tools is not restricted and can be changed to any other alternative ones, e.g. [tensorflow_dataset](https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets) or [torchvision](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/index.html).

+++

### Requirements installation

> Let's install required python packages

Author: It is described just above: 
> In the code below we make a choice of using OpenCV and Pillow to read images and masks as NumPy arrays, [Albumentations](https://github.com/albumentations-team/albumentations) for data augmentations and
[`grain`](https://github.com/google/grain/) for batched data loading. This choice of tools is not restricted and can be changed to any other alternative ones, e.g. [tensorflow_dataset](https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets) or [torchvision](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/index.html).

> Let's install required python packages

Reviewer: OOps sorry I missed that! Feel free to ignore then :)

        dilation: int = 1,
        bias: bool | None = None,
        rngs: nnx.Rngs = nnx.Rngs(0),
    ):
        self.out_channels = out_channels

        if padding is None:
            padding = (kernel_size - 1) // 2 * dilation
        if bias is None:
            bias = norm_layer is None

        # sequence integer pairs that give the padding to apply before
        # and after each spatial dimension
        padding = ((padding, padding), (padding, padding))

        layers = [
            nnx.Conv(
                in_channels,
                out_channels,
                kernel_size=(kernel_size, kernel_size),
                strides=(stride, stride),
                padding=padding,
                kernel_dilation=(dilation, dilation),
                feature_group_count=groups,
                use_bias=bias,
                rngs=rngs,
            )
        ]

        if norm_layer is not None:
            layers.append(norm_layer(out_channels, rngs=rngs))

        if activation_layer is not None:
            layers.append(activation_layer)

        super().__init__(*layers)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
jupyter:
  source_hidden: true
---

> class InstanceNorm(nnx.GroupNorm):

Author: Yes, there is a typo in `PatchEmbeddingBlock`, thansk for catching it

    def __call__(self, x_in: jax.Array) -> jax.Array:
        x, hidden_states_out = self.vit(x_in)
        enc1 = self.encoder1(x_in)
        x2 = hidden_states_out[3]
        enc2 = self.encoder2(self.proj_feat(x2))
        x3 = hidden_states_out[6]
        enc3 = self.encoder3(self.proj_feat(x3))
        x4 = hidden_states_out[9]
        enc4 = self.encoder4(self.proj_feat(x4))
        dec4 = self.proj_feat(x)
        dec3 = self.decoder5(dec4, enc4)
        dec2 = self.decoder4(dec3, enc3)
        dec1 = self.decoder3(dec2, enc2)
        out = self.decoder2(dec1, enc1)
        return self.out(out)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
# We'll use a different number of heads to make a smaller model
model = UNETR(out_channels=3, num_heads=4)
x = jnp.ones((4, 256, 256, 3))
y = model(x)
print(y.shape)
```

We can visualize and inpect the architecture on the implemented model using `nnx.display(model)`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# nnx.display(model)
```

## Train the model

In previous sections we defined training and validation dataloaders and the model. In this section we will train the model and define the loss function and the optimizer to perform the parameters optimization.

> For semantic segmentation task we can define the loss function as a sum of Cross-Entropy loss and Jaccard losses.

Author: I can add the following:
> The Cross-Entropy loss function is a standard loss function for a multi-class classification tasks and the Jaccard loss function helps directly optimizing Intersection-over-Union measure for semantic segmentation.

I do not have a good reference on Jaccard Loss function except this one : https://arxiv.org/pdf/1705.08790 where they proposed Lovasz-Softmax loss as another surrogate loss function to optimize IoU measure.

```{code-cell} ipython3
def compute_softmax_jaccard_loss(logits, masks, reduction="mean"):
    assert reduction in ("mean", "sum")
    y_pred = nnx.softmax(logits, axis=-1)
    b, c = y_pred.shape[0], y_pred.shape[-1]
    y = nnx.one_hot(masks, num_classes=c, axis=-1)

    y_pred = y_pred.reshape((b, -1, c))
    y = y.reshape((b, -1, c))

    intersection = y_pred * y
    union = y_pred + y - intersection + 1e-8

    intersection = jnp.sum(intersection, axis=1)
    union = jnp.sum(union, axis=1)

    if reduction == "mean":
        intersection = jnp.mean(intersection)
        union = jnp.mean(union)
    elif reduction == "sum":
        intersection = jnp.sum(intersection)
        union = jnp.sum(union)

    return 1.0 - intersection / union

def compute_losses_and_logits(model: nnx.Module, images: jax.Array, masks: jax.Array):
    logits = model(images)

    xentropy_loss = optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(
        logits=logits, labels=masks
    ).mean()

    jacc_loss = compute_softmax_jaccard_loss(logits=logits, masks=masks)
    loss = xentropy_loss + jacc_loss
    return loss, (xentropy_loss, jacc_loss, logits)
```

> Let us implement confusion matrix metric derived from [`nnx.Metric`](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.nnx/training/metrics.html#flax.nnx.metrics.Metric). Confusion matrix will help us to compute Intersection-Over-Union (IoU) metric: per class and the average. Finally, we can also compute accuracy metric using the confusion matrix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we will implement a confusion matrix metric derived from [`nnx.Metric`](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.nnx/training/metrics.html#flax.nnx.metrics.Metric). A confusion matrix will help us to compute the Intersection-Over-Union (IoU) metric per class and on average. Finally, we can also compute the accuracy metric using the confusion matrix.
```

    def compute(self) -> jax.Array:
        if self.average:
            confusion_matrix = self.confusion_matrix.value.astype("float")
            if self.average == "samples":
                return confusion_matrix / self.count.value
            else:
                return self.normalize(self.confusion_matrix.value, self.average)
        return self.confusion_matrix.value

    @staticmethod
    def normalize(matrix: jax.Array, average: str) -> jax.Array:
        """Normalize given `matrix` with given `average`."""
        if average == "recall":
            return matrix / (jnp.expand_dims(matrix.sum(axis=1), axis=1) + 1e-15)
        elif average == "precision":
            return matrix / (matrix.sum(axis=0) + 1e-15)
        else:
            raise ValueError("Argument average should be one of 'samples', 'recall', 'precision'")

def compute_iou(cm: jax.Array) -> jax.Array:
    return jnp.diag(cm) / (cm.sum(axis=1) + cm.sum(axis=0) - jnp.diag(cm) + 1e-15)

def compute_mean_iou(cm: jax.Array) -> jax.Array:
    return compute_iou(cm).mean()

def compute_accuracy(cm: jax.Array) -> jax.Array:
    return jnp.diag(cm).sum() / (cm.sum() + 1e-15)
```

> Let us now define training and evaluation steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let's define training and evaluation steps:
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
@nnx.jit
def train_step(
    model: nnx.Module, optimizer: nnx.Optimizer, batch: dict[str, jax.Array]
):
    # Comvert numpy arrays to jax.Array on GPU
    images = jnp.array(batch["image"])
    masks = jnp.array(batch["mask"], dtype=jnp.int32)

    grad_fn = nnx.value_and_grad(compute_losses_and_logits, has_aux=True)
    (loss, (xentropy_loss, jacc_loss, logits)), grads = grad_fn(model, images, masks)

    optimizer.update(grads)  # In-place updates.

    return loss, xentropy_loss, jacc_loss
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
@nnx.jit
def eval_step(
    model: nnx.Module, batch: dict[str, jax.Array], eval_metrics: nnx.MultiMetric
):
    # Comvert numpy arrays to jax.Array on GPU
    images = jnp.array(batch["image"])
    masks = jnp.array(batch["mask"], dtype=jnp.int32)
    loss, (_, _, logits) = compute_losses_and_logits(model, images, masks)

    eval_metrics.update(
        total_loss=loss,
        y_pred=logits,
        y=masks,
    )  # In-place updates.
```

> Let us now define metrics we want to compute during the evaluation phase: total loss and confusion matrix computed on training and validation datasets. Finally, we define helper objects to store metrics history.
> Metrics like IoU per class, mean IoU and accuracy will be computed using the confusion matrix in the evaluation code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also define metrics we want to compute during the evaluation phase: total loss and confusion matrix computed on training and validation datasets. Finally, we define helper objects to store the metrics history.
Metrics like IoU per class, mean IoU and accuracy will be computed using the confusion matrix in the evaluation code.
```

path = ocp.test_utils.erase_and_create_empty("/tmp/output-oxford-model/")
options = ocp.CheckpointManagerOptions(max_to_keep=2)
mngr = ocp.CheckpointManager(path, options=options)

def save_model(epoch):
    state = nnx.state(model)
    # We should convert PRNGKeyArray to the old format for Dropout layers
    # https://github.com/google/flax/issues/4231
    def get_key_data(x):
        if isinstance(x, jax._src.prng.PRNGKeyArray):
            if isinstance(x.dtype, jax._src.prng.KeyTy):
                return jax.random.key_data(x)
        return x

    serializable_state = jax.tree.map(get_key_data, state)
    mngr.save(epoch, args=ocp.args.StandardSave(serializable_state))
    mngr.wait_until_finished()
```

Now we can start the training. It can take around 1h30 using a single GPU and use 19GB of GPU memory.

```{code-cell} ipython3
%%time

best_val_mean_iou = 0.0
for epoch in range(num_epochs):
    train_one_epoch(epoch)
    if (epoch % 3 == 0) or (epoch == num_epochs - 1):
        val_mean_iou = evaluate_model(epoch)
        if val_mean_iou > best_val_mean_iou:
            save_model(epoch)
            best_val_mean_iou = val_mean_iou
```

> Let us check saved models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can check the saved models:
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
!ls /tmp/output-oxford-model/
```

> Let us visualize collected metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and visualize collected metrics:
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
plt.plot(eval_metrics_history["train_total_loss"], label="Loss value on training set")
plt.plot(eval_metrics_history["val_total_loss"], label="Loss value on validation set")
plt.legend()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
plt.plot(eval_metrics_history["train_mean_IoU"], label="Mean IoU on training set")
plt.plot(eval_metrics_history["val_mean_IoU"], label="Mean IoU on validation set")
plt.legend()
```

> Let us visualize model predictions on validation data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we will visualize model predictions on validation data:
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
model.eval()
val_batch = next(iter(val_loader))
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
images, masks = val_batch["image"], val_batch["mask"]
preds = model(images)
preds = jnp.argmax(preds, axis=-1)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
def display_image_mask_pred(img, mask, pred, label=""):
    if img.dtype in (np.float32, ):
        img = ((img - img.min()) / (img.max() - img.min()) * 255.0).astype(np.uint8)
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 5, figsize=(15, 10))
    axs[0].set_title(f"Image{label}")
    axs[0].imshow(img)
    axs[1].set_title(f"Mask{label}")
    axs[1].imshow(mask)
    axs[2].set_title("Image + Mask")
    axs[2].imshow(img)
    axs[2].imshow(mask, alpha=0.5)
    axs[3].set_title(f"Pred{label}")
    axs[3].imshow(pred)
    axs[4].set_title("Image + Pred")
    axs[4].imshow(img)
    axs[4].imshow(pred, alpha=0.5)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
for img, mask, pred in zip(images[:4], masks[:4], preds[:4]):
    display_image_mask_pred(img, mask, pred, label=" (validation set)")
```

> We can see that model can roughly predict the shape of the animal and the background and struggles with predicting the boundary. We can also observe that model starts overfitting according to the training and validation loss curves on the above plot. Carefully choosing hyperparameters and another optimizer like Adam we may achieve better results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that model can roughly predict the shape of the animal and the background and struggles with predicting the boundary. We can also observe that the model starts overfitting according to the training and validation loss curves on the above plot. Carefully choosing hyperparameters and another optimizer like Adam we may achieve better results.
```

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.15.2
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

> ## Image segmentation with JAX

Reviewer 2: This should be an H1 header

print("Train masks batch info:", type(train_batch["mask"]), train_batch["mask"].shape, train_batch["mask"].dtype)
```

Let's display the training and validation data

```{code-cell} ipython3
images, masks = train_batch["image"], train_batch["mask"]

for img, mask in zip(images[:3], masks[:3]):
    display_datapoint({"image": img, "mask": mask}, label=" (augmented train set)")
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
images, masks = val_batch["image"], val_batch["mask"]

for img, mask in zip(images[:3], masks[:3]):
    display_datapoint({"image": img, "mask": mask}, label=" (augmented validation set)")
```

## Model for Image Segmentation

In this section we will implement from scratch [UNETR](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.10504) model using Flax NNX. Reference PyTorch implementation of this model can be found on the GitHub in [MONAI library](https://github.com/Project-MONAI/MONAI/blob/dev/monai/networks/nets/unetr.py).

The UNETR model utilizes a transformer as the encoder to learn sequence representations of the input and to capture the global multi-scale information, while also following the “U-shaped” network design like [UNet](https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597) model:

> ![image.png](attachment:ed48cb36-b8c8-442f-b626-28e403b61ca2.png)

Reviewer 2: Did you mean to include this image in the PR?

Reviewer 2: It looks like notebook attachments are not supported: https://github.com/executablebooks/MyST-NB/issues/230

Maybe we can put it separately in an `html_static_path`

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.15.2
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

> # Image segmentation with JAX

Reviewer 2: Let's change this to something more specific, like "UNETR for image segmentation"

val_batch = next(iter(val_loader))
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
images, masks = val_batch["image"], val_batch["mask"]
preds = model(images)
preds = jnp.argmax(preds, axis=-1)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
def display_image_mask_pred(img, mask, pred, label=""):
    if img.dtype in (np.float32, ):
        img = ((img - img.min()) / (img.max() - img.min()) * 255.0).astype(np.uint8)
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 5, figsize=(15, 10))
    axs[0].set_title(f"Image{label}")
    axs[0].imshow(img)
    axs[1].set_title(f"Mask{label}")
    axs[1].imshow(mask)
    axs[2].set_title("Image + Mask")
    axs[2].imshow(img)
    axs[2].imshow(mask, alpha=0.5)
    axs[3].set_title(f"Pred{label}")
    axs[3].imshow(pred)
    axs[4].set_title("Image + Pred")
    axs[4].imshow(img)
    axs[4].imshow(pred, alpha=0.5)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
for img, mask, pred in zip(images[:4], masks[:4], preds[:4]):
    display_image_mask_pred(img, mask, pred, label=" (validation set)")
```

We can see that model can roughly predict the shape of the animal and the background and struggles with predicting the boundary. Carefully choosing hyperparameters we may achieve better results.

```{code-cell} ipython3

> ```

Reviewer 2: Remove empty cell
